High spectral resolution radiative transfer models provide the most accurate calculations of radiative perturbations due to greenhouse gases (GHGs), with errors in the instantaneous radiative forcing (IRF) of less than 1% (Mlynczak et al., 2016; Pincus et al., 2020). They can calculate IRFs with no adjustments, or SARFs by accounting for the adjustment of stratospheric temperatures using a fixed dynamical heating. It is not possible with offline radiation models to account for other adjustments. The high-resolution model calculations of SARF for carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide have been updated since AR5, which were based on Myhre et al. (1998). The new calculations include the shortwave forcing from methane and updates to the water vapour continuum (increasing the total SARF of methane by 25%) and account for the absorption band overlaps between carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide (Etminan et al., 2016). The associated simplified expressions, from a re-fitting of the Etminan et al. (2016) results by Meinshausen et al. (2020), are given in Supplementary Material, Table 7.SM.1. The shortwave contribution to the IRF of methane has been confirmed independently (Collins et al., 2018). Since they incorporate known missing effects we assess the new calculations as being a more appropriate representation than Myhre et al. (1998).

As described in (Section 7.3.1, ERFs can be estimated using ESMs, however the radiation schemes in climate models are approximations to high spectral resolution radiative transfer models with variations and biases in results between the schemes (Pincus et al., 2015). Hence ESMs alone are not sufficient to establish ERF best estimates for the well-mixed GHGs (WMGHGs). This assessment therefore estimates ERFs from a combined approach that uses the SARF from radiative transfer models and adds the tropospheric adjustments derived from ESMs.

In AR5, the main information used to assess components of ERFs beyond SARF was from Vial et al. (2013) who found a near-zero non-stratospheric adjustment (without correcting for near-surface temperature changes over land) in 4×CO2 CMIP5 model experiments, with an uncertainty of ±10% of the total CO2 ERF. No calculations were available for other WMGHGs, so ERF was therefore assessed to be approximately equal to SARF (within 10%) for all WMGHGs.

The effect of WMGHGs in ESMs can extend beyond their direct radiative effects to include effects on ozone and aerosol chemistry and natural emissions of ozone and aerosol precursors, and in the case of CO2 to vegetation cover through physiological effects. In some cases these can have significant effects on the overall radiative budget changes from perturbing WMGHGs within ESMs (Myhre et al., 2013b; Zarakas et al., 2020; O’Connor et al., 2021; Thornhill et al., 2021a). These composition adjustments are further discussed in (Chapter 6 (Section 6.4.2).