Future radiative forcing is uncertain due to as-yet-unknown societal choices that will determine future anthropogenic emissions; this is considered ‘scenario uncertainty’. The RCP and SSP scenarios, which form the basis for climate projections assessed in this Report, are designed to span a plausible range of future pathways (Section 1.6) and can be used to estimate the magnitude of scenario uncertainty, but the real world may also differ from any one of these example pathways.

Uncertainties also exist regarding past emissions and radiative forcings. These are especially important for simulations of paleoclimate time periods, such as the Pliocene, Last Glacial Maximum or the last millennium, but are also relevant for the CMIP historical simulations of the instrumental period since 1850. In particular, historical radiative forcings due to anthropogenic and natural aerosols are less well constrained by observations than the GHG radiative forcings. There is also uncertainty in the size of large volcanic eruptions (and in the location for some that occurred before around 1850), and the amplitude of changes in solar activity, before satellite observations. The role of historical radiative forcing uncertainty was considered previously (Knutti et al., 2002; Forster et al., 2013) but, since AR5, specific simulations have been performed to examine this issue, particularly for the effects of uncertainty in anthropogenic aerosol radiative forcing (e.g., Jiménez-de-la-Cuesta and Mauritsen, 2019; Dittus et al., 2020).

Under any particular scenario (Section 1.6.1), there is uncertainty in how the climate will respond to the specified emissions or radiative forcing combinations. A range of climate models is often used to estimate the range of uncertainty in our understanding of the key physical processes and to define the ‘model response uncertainty’ (Sections 1.5.4 and 4.2.5). However, this range does not necessarily represent the full ‘climate response uncertainty’ in how the climate may respond to a particular radiative forcing or emissions scenario. This is because, for example, the climate models used in CMIP experiments have structural uncertainties not explored in a typical multi-model exercise (e.g., Murphy et al., 2004) and are not entirely independent of each other (Section 1.5.4.8; Masson and Knutti, 2011; Abramowitz et al., 2019); there are small spatial-scale features which cannot be resolved; and long time-scale processes or tipping points are not fully represented. Section 1.4.4 discusses how some of these issues can still be considered in a risk assessment context. For some metrics, such as equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS), the CMIP6 model range is found to be broader than the very likely range assessed by combining multiple lines of evidence (Sections 4.3.4 and 7.5.6).