Large numbers of people live in regions where the annual mean precipitation is now ‘unfamiliar’ compared to the mean and variability between 1891 and 2016 (Figure 4.3c). “Unfamiliar” is defined as the long-term change being greater than one standard deviation in the annual data (Figure 4.3b). In 2020, approximately 498 million people lived in unfamiliarly wet areas, where the long-term average precipitation is as high as previously seen in only about one in 6 years (medium confidence) (Figure 4.3c). These areas are primarily in mid and high latitudes (Hawkins et al., 2020). On the other hand, approximately 163 million people lived in unfamiliarly dry areas, mostly in low latitudes (medium confidence). Due to high variability over time, the signal of long-term change in annual mean precipitation is not distinguishable from the noise of variability in many areas (Hawkins et al., 2020), implying that the local annual precipitation cannot yet be defined ‘unfamiliar’ by the above definition.

Notably, many regions have seen increased precipitation for part of the year and decreased precipitation at other times (high confidence) (Figure 4.3d,e), leading to small changes in the annual mean precipitation. Therefore, the numbers of people seeing unfamiliar seasonal precipitation levels are expected to be higher than those quoted above for unfamiliar annual precipitation changes (medium confidence). Still, quantified analysis of this is not yet available.

The intensity of heavy precipitation has increased in many regions (high confidence), including much of North America, most of Europe, most of the Indian sub-continent, parts of northern and southeastern Asia, much of southern South America, parts of southern Africa and parts of central, northern and western Australia (Figure 4.3 f) (Dunn et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020). Conversely, heavy precipitation has decreased in some regions, including eastern Australia, northeastern South America and western Africa. The length of dry spells has also changed, with increases in annual mean consecutive dry days (CDD) in large areas of western, eastern and southern Africa, eastern and southwestern South America, and Southeast Asia, and decreases across much of North America (Figure 4.3g). Precipitation extremes have changed in some places where annual precipitation shows no trend. Some regions such as southern Africa and parts of southern South America are seeing increased heavy precipitation and longer dry spells. Many regions with changing extremes are highly populated, such as the Indian sub-continent, Southeast Asia, Europe and parts of North America, South America and southern Africa (Figure 4.3h,i). Substantially more people (~709 million) live in regions where annual maximum one-day precipitation has increased than in regions where it has decreased (~86 million) (medium confidence). However, more people are experiencing longer dry spells than shorter dry spells: approximately 711 million people live in places where annual mean CDD is longer than in the 1950s, and ~404 million in places with shorter CDD (medium confidence) (Figure 4.3i).