Poleward and upward range shifts were already attributable to climate warming with high confidence in AR5. Publication of observed range shifts in accord with climate change have accelerated since AR5 and strengthened attribution. Ongoing latitudinal and elevational range shifts driven by regional climate trends are now well-established globally across many groups of organisms, and attributable to climate change with very high confidence due to very high consistency across a now very large body of species and studies and an in-depth understanding of mechanisms underlying physiological and ecological responses to climate drivers (Table 2.2; Table 2.3, Table SM2.1) (Pöyry et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2011; Grewe et al., 2013; Gibson-Reinemer and Rahel, 2015; MacLean and Beissinger, 2017; Pacifici et al., 2017; Anderegg et al., 2019). Range shifts stem from local population extinctions along warm-range boundaries (Anderegg et al., 2019) as well as from the colonisation of new regions at cold-range boundaries (Ralston et al., 2017).

Many studies since AR4 have tended not to be designed as attribution studies, particularly recent large-scale, multi-species meta-analyses. That is to say, all the data available was included in such studies (from both undisturbed and highly degraded lands and including very short-term data sets of <20 years), with little attempt to design the studies to differentiate the effects of climate change from those of other potential confounding variables. These studies tended to find greater lag and a lower proportion of species changing in the directions expected from climate change, with the authors concluding that LULCC, particularly habitat loss and fragmentation, was impeding wild species from effectively tracking climate change (Lenoir and Svenning, 2015; Rumpf et al., 2019; Lenoir et al., 2020).

Attribution is strong for species and species-interactions for which there is a robust mechanistic understanding of the role of climate on biological processes (high confidence). Unprecedented outbreaks of spruce beetles occurring from Alaska to Utah in the 1990s were attributed to warm weather that, in Alaska, facilitated a halving of the insect’s life cycle from two years to one (Logan et al., 2003). Milder winters and warmer growing seasons were likewise implicated in poleward expansions and increasing outbreaks of several forest pests (Weed et al., 2013), leading to the current prediction that 41% of major insect pest species will further increase their damage as climate warms, and only 4% will reduce their impacts, while the rest will show mixed responses (Lehmann et al., 2020).